---
title: "Announcing Penrose 3.0"
date: 2023-07-14
authors:
  - author: Wode Ni
    github: "wodeni"
  - author: Sam Estep
    github: "samestep"
---

<script setup>
import Author from "../.vitepress/theme/Author.vue";
import registry from "@penrose/examples/dist/registry.js";
import Gallery from '../src/components/GalleryWrapper.vue'
import {useData} from "vitepress"
const examples = ["spectral-graphs/examples/hypercube", "spectral-graphs/examples/hexagonal-lattice", "timeline/penrose", "walk-on-spheres/SignedAngleOutside"]
const trios = [...registry.entries()]
  .filter(([id]) => examples.includes(id))
  .map(([id]) => id);
</script>

<BlogMeta />

We are excited to announce Penrose 3.0! We've added many exciting diagrams to
our collection, reworked our core API, and improved support for more complex
geometric queries... among many other things!

---

## 🎨 New Diagrams

No Penrose release is complete without new beautiful diagrams. Here are some of
the new diagrams added to our repo in this release. We also added a new [gallery
page][] to our site.

<Gallery :trios="trios" />

Keenan Crane recently made [a tutorial of the walk-on-stars algorithm fully
illustrated by Penrose][wost]. This is the first LaTeX document made with
Penrose, made possible by these new features:

- "SVG (TeX)" export: now you can export a Penrose diagram from the [IDE][] as
  an SVG with labels optimized for imports using [the LaTeX `svg`
  package][tex-svg]. Keenan made the label font style and size consistent with
  the rest of his document.
- `roger` command-line rendering: [`roger` is now a headless renderer for Penrose
  diagrams!][roger pr]

## 👩‍💻 A more ergonomic API for `@penrose/core`

Over the past few months we've simplified our programmatic API to make it easier
for you to use Penrose in your own programs. a look at our docs for the
[high-level][language api] and [low-level][optimization api] parts of our API!

::: code-group

```javascript [highlevel.js]
import { compile, optimize, toSVG, showError } from "@penrose/core";
import trio from "./trio.js";

const compiled = await compile(trio);
// handle compilation errors
if (compiled.isErr()) {
  throw new Error(showError(compiled.error));
}
const converged = optimize(compiled.value);
// handle optimization errors
if (converged.isErr()) {
  throw new Error(showError(converged.error));
}
// render the diagram state as an SVG
const rendered = await toSVG(converged.value, async () => undefined);
const container = document.getElementById("diagram");
container.appendChild(rendered);
```

```javascript [lowlevel.js]
import { variable, pow, sub, problem } from "@penrose/core";
const x = variable(10);
const problem = await problem({ constraints: [pow(sub(x, 5), 2)] });
const { vals } = problem.start({}).run({});
console.log(problem.converged); // true
console.log(x); // a value closer to 5
```

:::

## 📐 Geometry queries and curve support

Many of the new diagrams in our gallery make use of some pretty powerful
graphics functions we've been adding to our library. You can find more
informatio for them in [our docs][functions], but here are a few fun ones:

- `rayIntersect` gives the first intersection point with a shape along a ray
- `closestSilhouettePoint` gives a shape's closest silhouette point to a point
- `isEquilateral` and `isEquiangular` constrain polygons to be more regular
- `curvatures` gives the curvature at each control point along a curve
- `inflectionEnergy` integrates the derivative of curvature raised to a power

## 👀 And more!

These only scratch the surface of all we've been working on! Take a look at our
[changelog][] to see the full list of changes, or check out some of our recent
[blog][] posts for deep dives into topics we didn't cover here:

- [Diagram Layout in Stages][blog stages]
- [What Have We Done to the Languages?][blog language]
- [Switching to Wasm for 10x Speedup][blog wasm]

We'd love to have you diagram with us! Join our [Discord][] and share a diagram
you make in Penrose, or if you're feeling more adventurous, check out our
[`CONTRIBUTING.md`][contributing] on GitHub for information about hacking on
Penrose itself.

**Happy diagramming!**

[blog]: /blog
[blog language]: /blog/new-language-features
[blog stages]: /blog/staged-layout
[blog wasm]: /blog/wasm
[changelog]: https://github.com/penrose/penrose/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md#v300-2023-07-14
[contributing]: https://github.com/penrose/penrose/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md
[discord]: https://discord.gg/a7VXJU4dfR
[functions]: /docs/ref/style/functions
[gallery page]: /examples
[ide]: pathname:///try/index.html
[language api]: /docs/ref/api
[optimization api]: /docs/ref/optimization-api
[roger pr]: https://github.com/penrose/penrose/pull/1387
[wost]: https://github.com/GeometryCollective/wost-simple
[tex-svg]: https://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/graphics/svg
